---
layout: post
title: Python functions' tutorial
date: 2024-12-12 08:57:00-0400
description: an example of a blog post with code
tags: programming
categories: python
featured: true
giscus_comments: true
related_posts: false
---

## Lecture 04 - Functions and debugging
In this lecture we are going to see how to write our own functions. But why do we need to write our own functions?

When we build our own programs, those programs are going to consist in hundreds or thousands of lines of code; therefore we should break such code into chunks that are smaller, more maintainable and potentially more reusable. We refer to these chunks are **functions**.


### How to write your own function
So, how can we create our own custom functions?

We start by using the `def` keyword, which is short for “define”; next we are going to give our function a name by following some best practices that can be found [here](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/); then we add round parentheses and a colon:


```python
# With this line, we start creating a new custom function
def my_dinner(): 
   None
```
After using the `def function_name():` notation, if we go to a newline, we are going to get **indentation**, which means that the statements that follow belong to the function that we just created:

```python
# Note! Both statements belong to the function because they are indented
def my_dinner(): 
   print('noodles') 
   print('mushrooms')
```

Now that we are done with writing our function we need to _call it_. **Calling** a function quite literally means to call the function and thus trigger its behaviour.

So we go to a newline, remove indentation, and use line breaks to make our code clean and readable.

```python
def my_dinner(): 
   print('noodles') 
   print('mushrooms')

my_dinner()
```

**Q**: What is the difference between the `my_dinner()` function and the `print()` functions? 
**A**: That the `my_dinner()` function does not take any input, while the `print()` function takes some input.

But we can also write custom functions that accept some input. Let’s modify our `my_dinner()` function so as to pass it some input, for example the types of ingredients. We distinguish between _parameters_ and _arguments_.

### Parameters vs. arguments

When defining a function, in between parentheses we are going to list our **parameters**, for instance:

```python
def my_dinner(noodle_type, side_type): 
   print('noodles') 
   print('mushrooms')
```

Now, when **calling** this function, we need to supply **values** for the parameters that we specified; we refer to these values as **arguments**:

```python
# def:                    keyword
# my_dinner:              function name
# noodle_type, side_type: function parameters
# print('Noodles'):       first statement
# print('Mushrooms'):     second statement
def my_dinner(noodle_type, side_type): 
   print('noodles') 
   print('mushrooms')

# my_dinner():            function calling
# 'glass', 'shiitake':    function arguments

my_dinner('glass', 'shiitake')
```

**Remember**
- Parameter = input of the function
- Argument = actual value of the parameter that we pass to the function

Now let’s change the function **statements** so as to accept the values that we pass to the function in input:

```python
# We can use string formatting!
def my_dinner(noodle_type, side_type): 
   print(f'{noodle_type} noodles') 
   print(f'{side_type} mushrooms')

my_dinner('glass', 'shiitake')
```
Now this function is more useful and we can call it with different arguments:

```python
my_dinner('soba', 'enoki') 
print('\n')
my_dinner('udon', 'stir fry') 
print('\n') 
my_dinner('ramen', 'oyster')
```



For displaying code in a list item, you have to be aware of the indentation, as stated in this [Stackoverflow answer](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/34987908/embed-a-code-block-in-a-list-item-with-proper-indentation-in-kramdown/38090598#38090598). You must indent your code by **(3 \* bullet_indent_level)** spaces. This is because kramdown (the markdown engine used by Jekyll) indentation for the code block in lists is determined by the column number of the first non-space character after the list item marker. For example:

````markdown
1. We can put fenced code blocks inside nested bullets, too.

   1. Like this:

      ```c
      printf("Hello, World!");
      ```

   2. The key is to indent your fenced block in the same line as the first character of the line.
````

Which displays:

1. We can put fenced code blocks inside nested bullets, too.

   1. Like this:

      ```c
      printf("Hello, World!");
      ```

   2. The key is to indent your fenced block in the same line as the first character of the line.

By default, it does not display line numbers. If you want to display line numbers for every code block, you can set `kramdown.syntax_highlighter_opts.block.line_numbers` to true in your `_config.yml` file.

If you want to display line numbers for a specific code block, all you have to do is wrap your code in a liquid tag:

{% raw %}
{% highlight c++ linenos %} <br/> code code code <br/> {% endhighlight %}
{% endraw %}

The keyword `linenos` triggers display of line numbers.
Produces something like this:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}

int main(int argc, char const \*argv[])
{
string myString;

    cout << "input a string: ";
    getline(cin, myString);
    int length = myString.length();

    char charArray = new char * [length];

    charArray = myString;
    for(int i = 0; i < length; ++i){
        cout << charArray[i] << " ";
    }

    return 0;

}

{% endhighlight %}